A very favorite part of our Gilead graduation program is the inside story where we get to know a few of our students a little bit more intimately.
So we're looking forward to hearing that now as it's presented by Brother Mark Numer.
80 years.
Those reaching this milestone in life are described as having special mightiness.
But does that apply just to people?
The 153rd class marks the 80th anniversary of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
During that span, the school has survived a World War country bands, legal threats, mob threats, and even a global pandemic.
But we've done more than just survive.
Welcome to this edition of the Inside Story.
At 2 Kings chapter 13 verse 18 and 19,
the prophet Elijah told King Jehoash to take the arrows and strike the ground.
This was to indicate his zeal and enthusiasm for Jehovah's work.
Sadly, the King's zeal was lacking.
How about those taking the lead of Jehovah's organization today?
Have they been striking the ground with hearts full of zeal and persistence?
Yes, they have, and Gilead school gives irrefutable evidence of this.
As World War II raged, Jehovah's spirit led our brothers to see the need for increased divine education before the end of this system.
The organization's president, Nathan Nor, directed the start of Gilead school in South Lansing, New York.
Starting in 1943, faithful men, such as Albert Schroeder, Russell Kerzen, Maxwell, Friend, Fredrick, Frans, and Eduardo Keller, instructed the first classes of students eager to go where people needed to hear the good news.
Since then, Gilead's location has changed, and instructors have changed, but one thing hasn't changed.
Gilead graduates have used their theocratic education to strengthen their brothers and sisters wherever they've been assigned.
As this world continues its downward spiral, Gilead continues to thrive and adapt as it meets the needs of Jehovah's growing organization.
And so with that, let's welcome our students and learn how the Gilead legacy has impacted them.
Please welcome our first guests, Brother and Sister Kunda, from Zambia.
We are so happy to have you with us on the inside story, Kenna and Chilla.
How long have you been serving in Zambia, and tell us about your assignments at the branch office?
We have been serving at the branch for five years now, and we're both assigned to the local design construction department, LDC.
Beautiful. And here we see a picture of these smiling faces. There's you, both, and who are the three others in the picture?
Those three are three field representatives, and this was during a kingdom home build that we visited.
We really enjoyed that assignment.
Well, obviously you did. Look at those smiling faces. That's building kingdom halls.
Kenna, you're working with LDC. How many kingdom halls are needed in Zambia?
So in the next five years, we need a thousand new kingdom halls, a thousand kingdom halls.
Now that fast growth of kingdom publishers, that's something that is marvelous to see.
In fact, what is the ratio there in Zambia?
Currently, there are a little over 190,000 publishers in Zambia, so that would make it approximately one witness to 99 people.
One to 99, and that is just wonderful. So what do you contribute to that?
I could think of two factors. First, anyone who visits Zambia remembers it for its warm-headed people.
They are very humble and welcome good conversations about the Bible.
Excellent. Well, then that is something that is very attractive. The truth is attractive to them.
Humble, warm-hearted. In fact, many people mentioned that to me that have visited Zambia as well. So good. What else?
The second factor is that the government is favorable towards Jehovah's Witnesses, allowing the preaching work to flourish.
That's right. In fact, the work of Jehovah's Witnesses has been highly regarded as a stabilizing influence on society.
And this in turn moves many honest-hearted ones to lend the truth.
That's the training Jehovah gives his people. Wouldn't you say the training, the divine education that God's people have been given,
now that translates into how they teach and how they interact with people. Wouldn't you say that?
Absolutely. In fact, thanks to that divine education, Jehovah's people apply that knowledge in their lives,
others see it. And all praise and glory goes to Jehovah. Beautiful.
So warm-hearted people, stabilizing influence in the community, growth, kingdom work and kingdom growth is happening in Zambia.
There's something else that's dear to all our hearts that has had an impact on the kingdom growth.
Well, what would that be, Chilla?
It's the Become Jehovah's Friend series with Kayla Bansafir.
These videos have taught valuable principles to young ones very effectively.
I like that. Valuable principles to young ones. So as these young ones are learning these Bible principles,
and that's instilled in their little hearts and minds, when they grow up, what's the result?
Yes, it's just wonderful to see how the organization is using the Become Jehovah's Friend series to the young ones,
because it's laying a foundation for them to become mature Christians when they grow up.
So they have a pattern of making decisions that reflect Jehovah's thinking.
They grow up, become pioneers and elders in the congregation.
Excellent. And you were speaking about one that in particular?
Yes. We have a good example of that with Jamin.
He's one of many young ones in Zambia who enjoys using the Become Jehovah's Friend series.
Yeah, and here we see a picture. Can you explain that picture?
So Jamin is closest to his dad on the left, both his parents, regular pioneers,
and they got his name from the video, warning examples for our day.
There's Jamin again.
Yeah, he's about six years old now, and you can see he looks very ready for the ministry.
He does.
Yeah, he enjoys using the videos because he's able to even recite them from the heart.
And he goes as far as even imitating Sophia and taking some publications with him to school.
And he does so good to the extent that even when he's packing the publication,
he has a friend in mind who he wants to give.
But it's that evangelizing spirit at a young age that's taking root in Zambia
because of the Become Jehovah's Friend series. Excellent.
Missionary spirit, here we go. Wonderful.
But when you think about the legacy of Gilead school and the missionary spirit there in Zambia,
this is the 80th anniversary of the school.
And also the impact in Zambia became very obvious early on.
In fact, the first Gilead missionaries to arrive in Zambia was in 1948,
with brothers Harry R. Not and John Ferguson.
And we see their pictures here.
They were in the eighth class of Gilead along with Stanley Jones and Harold King.
Those early days, those early classes of Gilead, 11% were of the anointed.
And that led to a stabilizing influence as well in the global field with Gilead graduates.
In fact, we went to the Gilead archives and we found some of brother Ferguson's handwritten letters.
And there's one.
In that letter, he mentions that in 1948, when he arrived,
there were only 15,000 publishers in Zambia.
Back then, the country was called Northern Rhodesia.
But it was his prayer that the watch tower would be translated into the local language Chibamba.
And he prayed for more missionaries to come.
What a beautiful spirit. Was that prayer answered?
Jehovah certainly answered those prayers.
Today, we have all the study publications translated, not just into Chibamba,
but into 12 other local languages.
Beautiful. And now to date, some 58 Gilead graduates have been assigned to Zambia.
So more publications, more translation, more Gilead graduates sent in.
What a legacy now that the Gilead school has had in Zambia.
I can say that those missionaries helped us in more ways than just the preaching work.
Well, why do you say that?
Around 1968, there was a ban on the work that resulted in the deportation of the initial group of missionaries.
And this was followed by a wave of persecution and opposition.
That made it a challenge to organize the work for the local brothers.
In fact, at one point, it seemed like the work was stagnating.
But in 1986, something exciting happened.
What happened?
Missionaries were allowed back into Zambia.
I remember that too. We were missionaries in East Africa.
And the lifting of the ban in Zambia was big news.
In fact, it excited us over in East Africa as well.
We prayed for the brothers in Zambia.
So we're so happy that things were able to move forward.
That showed that the work continued to pick up after that in 1986.
What happened after 1986?
In fact, there was a great increase in new publishers.
And so the missionaries helped the new ones to progress to maturity, stabilizing them.
And speaking to the local brothers that served during that time,
they especially appreciate how the missionaries helped them organize the work from the branch office.
And from there, they helped the field thrive and experience incredible growth.
So you're saying the local brothers, the missionaries work together,
and that would have been positive results?
Absolutely.
Good.
How did the local brothers respond when the missionaries came into work with them?
I would say that was the best part.
The local publishers came to love the missionaries.
They were so kind and humble right from the start.
It opened their eyes to the fact that we're all one and the same.
And to see the missionaries try and say a greeting in the local language,
it was nice to see.
But to see them progress from just a greeting,
then to holding a long conversation,
and even giving a public talk in my local language,
that was her warming.
That must have been wonderful to hear and to see.
Yes.
And the missionaries also didn't rush their time with the local publishers
and this helped them to learn more about the culture.
For example, accepting a meal invitation after an assembly.
They would be tired, and they would be hungry too.
But this was not a quick meal at a restaurant.
It meant going home.
Getting food prepared.
Yes.
Getting the chicken ready.
Exactly.
And then it meant you ate late,
and they had to go home late.
But the highlight of this was the encouragement that they gave us.
They encouraged us to pursue spiritual goals.
We could see the love that they had for us.
But most importantly, we could feel it.
Excellent.
Do you agree, Kenna?
Yes, I do.
I experienced that at a young age.
What happened?
At one time, my family had a missionary couple over for lunch.
Brother and sister Finch.
We had a good meal.
A wonderful time.
But what we remembered from that day was something totally different.
A few days after they left, the Finch sent us a small thank you card.
They expressed appreciation for the time and shared a scriptural thought too.
That they took the time to do this touched all of us deeply.
In fact, my father used that card as an object lesson in teaching us children how to show gratitude
when others do kind things for us.
Isn't that wonderful?
It's these little acts of love.
These little stitches of love that make this close knit bond of loving brotherhood there in Zambia.
Oh, there's brother and sister Finch there with you.
Yes.
You can see from the smile that they have become fully Zambia now.
We're happy to serve with them.
Excellent.
And continue learning many valuable lessons from them.
Good. Excellent.
So what if we show now the audience a short video clip of Zambia and what's happening there
and the work, would you like to do that?
Yes.
Absolutely.
Okay, let's watch.
Located in South Africa, Zambia is about a quarter of a million square miles,
a little larger than the state of Texas in the United States.
Zambia is home to beautiful forests, the mighty Zambia is a river, magnificent waterfalls and abandoned wildlife.
Yes.
And because of our marked climate, we enjoy a rich variety of foods.
But the real beauty of Zambia lies in its people.
You can find your harvest people almost everywhere you go.
And the ministry continues to be ripe for harvesting.
If you called on a person in the morning and a witness comes in the afternoon,
in other countries they'll let you know that that's happened.
And Zambia, they'll just listen a second time.
When going from house to house, sometimes a person will invite you not to enter their house,
but to sit under the mango tree.
They bring their tins, their buckets, or whatever, and you sit there and then you can speak with them.
And sometimes they even will collect their Bible from inside when they see you,
because they know you're there to discuss the Bible.
So they're very lovable people.
The simple, friendly approach that the brothers and sisters have to the ministry,
they're strong belief that everyone is a potential friend of Jehovah.
That helps them to make spiritual progress with people.
Can everyone in Zambia be a Jehovah's Witness?
Well, I think it's a good goal to have.
Zellas Proclaimers come in all shapes and sizes.
Would you like to see Jamie in action?
I want to be like Jamie when I grow up.
I know. Me too.
Jamie is one of many young ones in Zambia right now that are making Jehovah's hearts so happy.
So, if you travel to Zambia, what will you find?
You will see a great crowd of loyal and hardworking Kingdom Proclaimers.
And while we're all different colors and ages and sizes,
we are one big happy family.
Thanks to a happy God, Jehovah.
Now, that was just a beautiful video clip.
Thank you so much.
But, Kenneth, the brothers' sister at the end with brothers' sister Finch,
they look like you.
That's mom and dad.
And that's them meeting the features in almost 25 years.
What a beautiful reunion that must have been.
And are they with us today?
Yes. In fact, they're somewhere in the audience.
Excellent. I bet they're very proud of you both.
Thank you so much.
And thank you for sharing your comments with us with the Inside Story.
Just watching this video helps us to see why the love and the joy of the Zambian people come through very, very loud and clear.
So, with that, we say thank you.
Next, please welcome Eric and Megan Lee from Micronesia.
We are so happy to have you, Eric and Megan, on the Inside Story.
So, tell us, before coming to Gilead, you were serving in the Micronesia branch.
And that is located on the beautiful island of Guam.
So, how long have you been serving there and what's your work like at Bessel?
Well, I've been serving there for the last 10 years.
The last eight of those years, Megan and I have been serving at the branch office together.
And I currently work in the service department.
Good. And what about you, Megan? What's your work assignment?
I work in the translation department.
And we support the work of six remote translation offices throughout Micronesia.
Beautiful. I bet that's a lot of work.
Thank you for doing it.
Now, on our screen, we have a very interesting picture, Eric.
What is happening here? Tell us about it.
This is the two of us when we visited the island of Pompeii.
We were sent there to help teach a Bethel service school.
But this is when we first arrived on the island at the airport.
We were greeted by the brothers and sisters.
And they gave us what you see on the top of our heads.
What is that?
Locally, those are called modemars.
And they're hand-woven by the brothers and sisters.
And they're often given to guests when they first arrive.
I mean, that's a lot of work to make those.
And it shows the hospitality and love. Very nice. Thank you.
So now, Megan, I understand you were born on Guam.
So what was it like growing up on the island of Guam?
Tell us about it.
Well, it is a small island.
So no matter where you are, the branch office is never far away.
It was definitely a special privilege to be able to grow up so close to Bethel.
How far would the branch have been from where you were raised?
Maybe a little less than 15 minutes.
Bethel was in your backyard.
It was very close.
Excellent. So how did that impact you?
It was very special to be so close to a center of spiritual activity
where so many brothers and sisters are working hard full-time for Jehovah.
Eventually, my sister started commuting to Bethel.
And she invited me to join her.
So we were able to do that together.
Excellent. So you commuted to Bethel with your sister.
And who's older? You were her.
She is.
She is. Okay. Very nice.
But what a privilege to be together commuting there at the Bethel in Guam.
And what about you, Eric?
Tell us about yourself.
What about your family?
Well, my mom was born on Guam.
Her side of the family is from there.
But she grew up in Washington state.
That's where she met my father.
But something interesting happened for my mom before she was married.
What was that?
Well, after she graduated high school, she took a trip to Guam.
And she was impressed by the need that was there.
So much so that she had this strong desire to go back to Guam someday in order to preach there.
We call that the missionary spirit.
And she wanted to go back.
So tell us what happened.
Well, my parents were married and they served in Brooklyn, Bethel.
But in 1979, they attended Kiliat school.
Oh, interesting.
They had graduated from the 67th class of Diliat.
And then my mom's dream came true.
They got their assignment.
Their assignment was Guam.
Oh, beautiful.
Excellent.
They absolutely loved that assignment.
And then some years later, my siblings and I came along.
So then what happened?
Well, after some years, we moved back to Washington state.
But even though we left Guam, something never changed for my parents.
What was that?
Their love for the people of Guam never changed.
So though they were geographically located outside of Guam in the United States here in Washington,
their heart was still in Guam.
And did that influence you as a young man?
It sure did.
They still had that missionary spirit.
And they wanted to encourage us to reach out and do more.
So one time as an entire family, we visited Guam.
During that trip, I fell in love with Guam.
You did.
I loved it so much that when I turned 19, I decided to move to Guam by myself.
And then at a convenient time, the rest of my family ended up moving out to Guam as well.
And in fact, both my parents are still serving there now.
Isn't that wonderful?
So your mother and father, their love for the people in Guam, evidently influenced you
because you fell in love with the people in Guam too.
I sure did.
Especially someone very special.
Excellent.
So what do we see here, Eric?
This is a picture of my family just outside the kingdom hall that we attended when we were young.
It's my parents, my older sister, my two younger brothers, and that is me standing in the back.
And we have another picture too.
This is again all of us, but when we're a little more grown up,
we were together on Guam at a convention.
And now your parents are still in Guam serving there.
What a good example they must have set, though, for you and the family and the siblings,
and how encouraged they must have been that you too had that missionary spirit.
Beautiful.
Tell us, how many publishers there are in Micronesia at this time?
Well, we have about 1,200 publishers that's throughout all the islands in Micronesia.
And I know that number may not sound like much, but actually it is a really impressive number.
And what makes it impressive?
Well, I think it's the fact that new ones face a definite challenge before they come in the truth.
The communities in Micronesia are very small, they're very close-knit,
and people really depend on one another for everyday life.
So when someone becomes a witness, they can be viewed by their community as an outsider,
and they lose that connection to that support system that they've had for so long.
So it's a real test of faith for them to trust that Jehovah can and will take care of them.
Yeah, must not be easy.
It sure isn't easy for many of them.
But despite those challenges, many honest-hearted ones courageously take a stand to join Jehovah's people.
Beautiful.
And when they do that, they receive a wonderful blessing.
They end up becoming like a family to one another.
So when there is that time of need, they're right there to help them.
Beautiful.
It's something that's very touching to see.
So the love of Micronesia is obvious and evident.
And can you relate another example of the Christian love there in Micronesia?
One that very quickly comes to mind for both of us is the island of Koshri.
Koshri.
Now, we don't hear often about Koshri.
Can you tell us about it?
It's a very small island that has just one congregation of about eight publishers,
yet they're so faithful and loyal to Jehovah.
Interesting.
Faith publishers.
But Jehovah's interested in this small group, just like in Noah's day, they were just eight.
Koshri has about eight.
So how was Jehovah's interest shown in them?
Well, it's very clear from the translation work that's being done.
Jehovah's organization provides publications that are translated into their local language.
It's just so incredible to see because what other organization would do that besides Jehovah's?
Beautiful.
But it is proof that he's reassuring them that he sees them and that he loves them.
Oh, they must be thrilled with that.
Thank you for sharing that very important point.
So what do we have?
We have a paradesic assignment.
But it does come with some challenges, as you say.
The courage to stand up for one's beliefs.
The islands just having a few publishers.
These are challenges.
Am I missing anything?
Well, something else that comes to mind is that some of these islands are so remote.
And because of that, they don't always have very good internet.
And that means it can be a challenge to get the spiritual food to our brothers and sisters at times.
So how would they meet that challenge?
Well, a huge help has been the JW box.
We see a picture of it here.
The JW box is a small device.
It can actually fit in your hand.
And the JW box can connect to the internet and download almost anything that's available on JW.org.
Isn't that beautiful?
And then once it downloads publications and videos, the brothers and sisters can connect their personal devices to the JW box.
And then they have access to all of this spiritual food without them ever needing to connect to the internet themselves.
Now, that is a wonderful provision.
And we thank the faithful and discrete slave to make sure the brothers and coast rye are spiritually nourished, beautiful.
The Gilead legacy.
It continues on there in Micronesia.
It was started back there in 1954 when the first Gilead train missionaries came to Micronesia.
And we see a picture of them, that Sam Weiger and his wife Virginia.
And at that time, there were only about 12 publishers in Guam.
But never despised the day of small beginnings.
Because with their arrival, the Gilead legacy was set in motion.
And now the Micronesia branch territory, it spreads over a large area with many islands.
Yes. And some of these islands you can't reach by plane.
You can only take a boat to get there.
So the branch office has organized preaching campaigns where boats of witnesses go to these different islands and preach there.
And that's actually what we see in this picture here.
So by boat, the brothers reach this island.
And what are we seeing? Is this a congregation meeting or?
After a few days of preaching on the island, this was their last day.
And they invited all the interested ones to come together to this group meeting.
And what they did, they had a group Bible study.
But they focused on teaching these interested ones.
How to study the Bible Teachbook on their own.
That way when the brothers and sisters left, they could still feed themselves spiritually.
Oh, that is so encouraging. Thank you so much for sharing.
So it's a beautiful island, true.
But it's the precious people in the island that are really benefiting from Jehovah's provisions.
So what should we do?
Should we take a trip to the Micronesia islands and visit the brothers and see how they're doing?
Would you like to do that?
We'd love that.
Good. Let's pay attention to the video.
Located in the Western Pacific Ocean, Micronesia is one of three major island regions,
along with Polynesia and Melanesia.
The word Micronesia means small islands and includes some 2,000 scattered islands.
Yet the islands are so tiny that their combined landmass is only about 1,055 square miles or 2,730 square kilometers.
Not much larger than that of Rhode Island, the smallest state in the United States.
The branch is located on the island of Guam, but is referred to as the Micronesia branch.
Most people think of paradise when they come to Micronesia.
But it's the spiritual paradise that is truly breathtaking.
That's right. The brothers and sisters are hardworking and loyal for Jehovah's name.
For example, on the island of Koshra, they may be a small group, but they are sending up a great shout of praise to Jehovah.
What I love about our assignment in Koshra is that the people, they really have a love for the Bible.
It's very easy to have Bible studies or long conversations with people.
So it makes it very easy to talk to them about spiritual things, makes the ministry very enjoyable.
In case you saw a family resemblance, that wasn't just our sister in the truth. That was Megan's real sister.
We're so proud of them and all those exerting themselves vigorously to reach honest-hearted people in remote areas.
And don't forget time zones.
All right.
The circuit we're currently in is made up of four different time zones.
Eight different islands and from east to west, it's a distance of about 2,500 miles.
And in our circuit, there's actually seven different languages.
It's a lot of work each week. We pack our bags and then move on to the next island.
The friends are never alone, no matter how far out they might be or how few publishers might be there.
We see generosity, we see contentment, we see zeal.
Jehovah's taking care of them.
On these islands, the precious resources are definitely Jehovah's people.
Absolutely.
Micronesia may be remote, but once you're here, you're home.
Eric, that was beautiful. Once you're here, you're home.
Thank you for making it your home, too. And to meet your sister like that,
I know you're proud of her. You said you were and we're proud of her, too, and proud of you.
And that circuit over here, a couple.
They're doing a great work, aren't they there?
They sure are.
Yeah, self-sacrificing spirit. We could say that the Gilead or the missionary legacy continues there in Micronesia.
Thank you so much.
Well, it's very clear that the Jehovah's blessing, the brothers in Micronesia, the work is thriving.
And Megan and Eric, it's just a pleasure to have you with us, not just in class,
but as part of the inside story, and we wish you the best in the days ahead.
Thank you.
So what do you think?
Can a school have special mightiness? It can.
If Jehovah backs it, and that's exactly what he has done for Gilead school.
Repeatedly, it has been made clear that Jehovah's blessing the governing bodies
efforts to promote and to support divine education throughout the earth.
Why all this education?
In the words of Brother Nor, we want to move to higher levels of understanding,
so that we get deeper into the thoughts of Jehovah as he expressed them in his word.
Therefore, nothing can stop divine education and nothing will ever slow it down.
The world says 80 years is probably time to slow down.
But to Jehovah's people, 80 is just getting started.
Until the next time on the inside story.
Thank you so much, Brother Numer, and those who participated with you.
That was just outstanding.
Imagine 80 years of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
You know, we just remembered the other day that the brothers, when they initiated Gilead,
thought they would only have enough resources to be able to have the school for five years.
Amazing to think what Jehovah has accomplished.